---
author: micael nussbaumer
layout: Micaelnussbaumer.PostLayout
title: "What is reality?"
slug: what-is-reality-
date: 2026-03-17 00:00:00 +07:00
permalink: /posts/:slug
categories:
- philosophy
---

Yes, it's not like we won't be talking about it but it's a bit of a clickbait title. Have you seen `"Inception"` the movie? The one starring Leonardo DiCaprio. One thing that caught my attention was that all characters had a "token", a physical "artefact", they could use to discern if they were inside a dream or in the real "reality" itself.

In case of Leonardo's character he has a spinning top, that has a very peculiar property, when it's spun in a dream it never stops spinning, while obviously in the real "reality" due to the laws of physics it eventually stops spinning. This is sort of a "Deus Ex Machina" for the history but it plays really well and doesn't feel like one because the effect only becomes "supernatural" when its owner is dreaming, so in fact, the artifact doesn't have itself any magical property.

In terms of story though, if you squint, this is like a magical sword in a fantasy movie, or a special inhuman ability someone has in some other kind of story.

It's the interplay of that supposed property of the "token" with the "dream" universe of the movie that allows major plot progressions, and in a way lead, perhaps, to the most poignant question that the movie raises, when in the ending scene we see Leonardo's character in his supposed real home, we hear the voices of his children in the background, signifying they're playing outside, it has an idillic mountain/camp house ambience to the scene, yet at the same time, the spinning top is spinning on top of the table. The scene lingers a bit and cuts to the end. It's that lingering that makes it the most poignant scene in my opinion, because it kinda feels when you're watching just before it cuts that the spin top was already spinning a bit more than what would feel normal, and then it cuts and you don't have your answer. So without the spinning top you can't know if the character is eventually in "real" life and found the happiness with his family - that he continuously says is one of the motivations throughout the movie - or if the character is in a dream, addicted to a certain dream and is returning to it, and if so if either he's there voluntarily or he's stuck and doesn't know.

There's that final tension. I find some parallels to what our experiences in this reality, whatever it might be, can ultimately reveal us about reality itself.

In a way you can't really know if you're in a materialistic first reality, a conscious first reality, a simulation or a God made reality - that is functionally equivalent to a simulation, in the sense that for you, as the subjective experiencer of reality, wouldn't be able to tell a simulation from a God made reality, because they can look like exactly the same.

If I think about it, how could I know I'm in the "ultimate" reality, the real one and not in a dream, or a simulation (all those are functionally equivalent, so I'm going to refer to them as simulation from now on).
I need either something internal or external to this reality to show me that, or I need to have noticed or understood some detail that would indicate so.
Because how could you test it? And even if you were to be shown, or understood it by yoursel, or somehow woke up, got enlightened, whatever, then what? How could you know that you were not in another simulation or dream? And this is basically the problem. "We" don't have a magical spinning top and "we" don't know what "we" don't know.

So let's see the different types of philosophies that we can think of coming out of these different approaches we could take.

A materialistic first reality. This is what most atheists, marxists, utilitarians, etc, ascribe. They say there's nothing else than matter that happens to become conscious by chance and from there we get here through a sort of evolution. Notice here that when I say matter, because you are starting without consciouness, this can only be rocks, minerals, liquids? Not sure there can liquids without life, but anyway it's this type of matter, not matter like tree bark, or flesh, because those can't exist without consciousness. This branch doesn't provide a framework for before, or after, sure, some theories might present but they're far from being even significant in gathered support for their views and not proved (some not provable with what we know and tools we have right now).

So the biggest gap in this philosophy, to me, is how do we go from unconscious matter to consciousness. I like to imagine it like this. Have you seen a lightning storm? One that goes for a while? Like those lightnings they occurr in that situation, in that context, atmospheric, temperature, etc, but they're fickle. The lightnings strike and disappear, the charge just dissipates into the material world. The conditions change, the lightning no longer strikes. So how could electricity be stored in matter in a way that would give rise to biological beings with consciousness?

It seems that a vessel that could contain the current in order to use it for consciousness has to be "designed" before (not strictly in the sense of intelligent design, just that it has to have come up somehow before) consciousness arises in the material world, because otherwise, how would it come to be? But then how would life get to that design without life a-priori, just from rocks and thunder? A rock charged with electricity wouldn't be able to give rise to intelligence RANDOMLY (yes, silicon indeed can be charged and "think", but it has to be excruciatingly designed at a scale beyond human sight, and it still doesn't evolve into a biological cell that has a self programmed will - I'm not even saying we can't get there, but I'm really doubtful that such sequence could happen randomly in a total material world).

The biggest problem is that, is that without will/consciousness, that are immaterial properties, there's no reason for life to come into existance. Why wouldn't the universe be just rocks floating in space right?
Even if we assume that because it has no beginning and no end it's infinite, and by being so it guarantees that all possible combinations of matter will occurr at some point, and as such can be assumed to have occurred and we can use it as assumed condition, even if a complex structure by pure random chance, that would be 2.225074e-308 but we're assuming the universe is infinite so we can assume this will too happen sometime along the way to infinity, and as such we can assume that that point is in fact now (or like some billion years ago), and was able to hold electricity in a contained way, why would that lead to consciousness? It seems that consciousness needs to be there a-prior to enable it to emerge. A bit of a snake eating its tail, or as we say in Portuguese, pescadinha de rabo na boca (hake with the ass/tail in its mouth) situation. 

That's my biggest gripe with it, it can't explain anything of the mistery. It also gave rise - until quantum physics started cimenting themselves - to many branches of determinism. Like the thought that all humans are the same at birth (beyond the "rights"), just separated by class, hence material conditions, and that they're a white page that then can be culturally and symbolically programmed into an "higher" man - very common in all forms of socialism, be it national or international. Although it is clear that the cultural, material, social dimensions have a direct and significant impact on the adult human one becomes, it's not in that way. You can't make an assembly line.

The variations, and they go back to the sperm and egg that eventually agree to fuse, result in individuals that have underlying "hardware" different between themselves. So while you can create a "program", your programming doesn't guarantee a deterministic result. For instance, imagine an overly harsh, militaristic, homophobic father. He makes it all clear all the times yet, sometimes the son comes out gay. Or imagine a school, you teach a subject, the professor has an inclination, can't work around the bias, yet, even then, different people will react differently to the things he will be talking about, and creating different interpretations. Now, in both cases, they all can exhibit and behave as if they weren't, and agreed, respectively, but their inner monologues can be different from what they "signal" publicly. 

Obviously, if used to an extensive extent and well done, you can almost "create a new man", the thing is that it never really changes, it just puts on a facade according to the programming. But still, eventually, these systems, even those that manage that, seem to falter and fall. It's the nature of the human that never really changes. With the advent of quantum physics the classical model of physics stopped being the only way to describe reality, in fact, it became obvious that it's not total in any way and only coincidentally very useful, so determinism suffered a blow, but it recouped by integrating quantum physics' randomness, and allowing free-will. Materialism on the other hand has a bigger problem in my opinion because how does it bridge that gap between the materiality described and the apparent immateriality of certain aspects of reality.

If we look at a conscious first reality, on the other hand, it's immediately out of reach from a pure physics description, since we can't even define consciousness in any relevant non-ambiguous form. A conscious first reality allows many more easier answers - because they can't be tested as of now, only theorised - such as, if consciousness is in fact the underlying basis of reality, solving how do we get to conscious entities is pretty straightforward logically. The consciousness "field" gives rise itself to vessels that can contain consciousness, pretty much as the seed of a tree knows what the fruit will be and how to get there. In the end, the fruit bears the seed right? As you see, it's pretty straightforward and in case consciousness is the basis of reality it would make intuitive sense that it was so that we came to be. Variations of this chain of thought are gaya theories, cosmic universalism, etc. Again, if consciousness is the basis then the universe evolution is a manifestation of the will of that abstract consciousness, and the coming into existence of Earth itself too, and the evolution of life, etc. Similar to gaya (Earth) theories, where it's all the same thing and interconnected system that manifests in heterogeneous looking realities while sharing the same universal basis. In my opinion, such a view is ultimately indistinguishable (to the experiencer) from a God made reality or a simulation, although its conceptual frameworks are different. 

Now lets turn our attention to the next possibility, a God made reality. This branch of thinking obviously pressuposes the existence of a God that is above all. This is needed because how can you go from nothing to something? And if not, if everything, or something is always there, how can that be, how and why does it sustain itself eternally? Ĩf in your mind for some reason that second question leads to a nonsensical answer - the reason being you think there needs to always have a start and an end, and you don't believe (logic, personal experience, wtv) that the world is first and foremost material (because you had some experience that leads you to believe it's metaphysical due to syncronicities or wtv), then your only option is to believe in God, in some way. It's also why perhaps most of the advancements in science all started in religious contexts, it's very probable even that the experience of natural phenomena that seems to follow a logical reason strenghtens the belief in some logical order that precedes everything - it seems we can understand even parts of the invisible and all sorts of things beyond our natural abilities, and that those parts seem to be in their own way and context consistent (in the logical sense).

When we look at several scientists many do affirm a belief in God, and we can probably look at their unwavering dedication (sometimes ungratefully treated, not rewarded, etc) as the side effect of their belief in a logical God, because if God is logical then it must follow that reality, specially because he created it, is logical too, and if we're created in his image then the understanding of those logical connections should be in reach. At the same time, depending on how many people you would consider idiot, it could be used as an argument against the idea that God created us in his image, since there would be so many idiots that it would have to mean that God was in some fundamental level idiot too. But that is kind of elided by the argument of free will.

Going back to scientists. I'm not saying that the story of the apple falling is what gave Newton the idea for gravity, but I'm pretty sure we all have been, either directly or as observers, of situations where someone says "na, this must mean this, because of this and that", or "this isn't really possible in any reasonable way" and then someone goes "no, it's because this and that and you can see here and there", or "wait, but couldn't we do this and that, and then we get that? It seems like it should work". Right? People look at things, sometimes the same exact thing and they don't have the same ideas, associations, connections, feelings, being triggered. Taking the story of the apple falling, we could ask, how many people in the whole history of humanity have seen apples falling? So the question shouldn't be "If a tree falls in a forest and no one is around to hear it, does it make a sound?", it should be, "If a tree falls in front of you do you even see it?".

God has to somehow be bigger (in a energetic, intellect and informational sense) than the universe he's creating, otherwise how could he bring it to existence? More specifically, how could that entity be omniscient? If we know that each manifest bit of reality can't be reduced informationally to 0, otherwise it ceases to have any distinguishing feature from the remaining bits, and if it seems that the universe is infinite, for a conscious entity to be omniscient of every bit of it, it would need to be infinitesimally bigger than the universe it's omniscient about, otherwise where would the information upon which the omniscience is based exist? So we have to assume that if God created it, He has to exist beyond that which he created, and due to his other qualities, we must assume those other properties (e.g.: if God is omniscient about an infinite universe, he must be infinite Himself to accommodate all the quanta of information required to do any meaningful action that has any semblance of justice, morality and/or compassion).

It could also be that the things that matter are in fact invisible and in much less abundance and the exuberance of life is but mirrors, so that God would only need to keep track of a very small subset of reality to keep its supposed attributes of justice, fairness. Obviously, there could be other ways, but these are those that I can think of that make any sense. God could obviously not be definable or comprehensible by the combination of my own material body and mind. 

The same with relation to other gods, if there can be many gods and they can each create "realms" totally independent from each other, then this is less of a "God made reality", an instead the direct equivalent of a simulation, since each "realm" (the combination of people believing and some sort of organisative structure) will have its own rules according to who created it or rules it. If that is so then it shouldn't be that we have a universal baseline of what we deem moral, just and fair, that has been trending to the same direction across the whole world, mostly due to dialetics, war and commerce. It should be that each reality of each God would be, to have any semblance of fairness, rewarding of the qualities those Gods desire. So multiple competing Gods doesn't seem to lead towards that universalism either, because you can't be fair if you accept different measures of moral, justice and fairness. That's why for a God made reality to make sense you need monotheism in my view. The hindus thread sort of a mixed way, but they get a bit lost on the definitions in my opinion.

“Whence this creation has arisen — perhaps it formed itself, or perhaps it did not. The One who looks down on it, in the highest heaven, only He knows — or perhaps He does not know.”

In the end they seem to not conclude anything about how or who created reality, which is a very sensible position but makes it so that it's not really believing in a God made reality, just not refusing that possibility, hence why I say it's sort of a mixed way.

On Christianity and other monotheistic religions they argument that God precedes reality, and it's God himself that designs reality to his will, including yourself.

Because this isn't a particular essay on each of these branches of ideas, but instead an attempt to showcase why they come to exist and how they mold and format our understanding, our ways of life, our choices, otherwise how could it fit in a blog post, there's probably entire libraries written about these topics, let's move to the simulation reality.

Like I mentioned before, as simulation I will treat both in the technical sense and the metaphorical sense, both the possibility of living in a software based simulation, or in an hardware based one, both are the same for our purposes because they would look exactly the same to you, unless you had some spinning top to help you discern (I guess in the hardware one not even that). The same with like, ideas of an alien seeding, or extraterrestrial meddling with earth bound creatures, spiritually, genetically or whatever, all those, render the same situation, for you, e.g.: if you were seeded by aliens but you think you have evolved naturally from apes, or that God created you, it would be equivalent to living in a simulation, although there's no intrinsic desire to "simulate" anything.

That's an important point. In this chain of thought, given what we know about the human body, reality, mind, we can imagine a technical situation or context where we would be experiencing a "simulation". If we can have Neura links messing around directly with memories, if we can figure a way to manipulate those memories directly, we could create a totally simulated experience, that anybody under that experience wouldn't be able to tell apart from their everyday experience, at least while in it. Right? So one of the things that messes this chain of thought is the "why?". Because depending on the why, or even if you can find one for your view, changes completely the ramifications of your experience of the simulation.

