---
author: micael nussbaumer
layout: Micaelnussbaumer.PostLayout
title: "What is reality?"
slug: what-is-reality-
date: 2026-03-17 00:00:00 +07:00
permalink: /posts/:slug
categories:
- philosophy
---

Yes, it's not like we won't be talking about it but it's a bit of a clickbait title. Have you seen `"Inception"` the movie? The one starring Leonardo DiCaprio. One thing that caught my attention was that all characters had a "token", a physical "artefact", they could use to discern if they were inside a dream or in the real "reality" itself.

In case of Leonardo's character he has a spinning top, that has a very peculiar property, when it's spun in a dream it never stops spinning, while obviously in the real "reality" due to the laws of physics it eventually stops spinning. This is sort of a "Deus Ex Machina" for the history but it plays really well and doesn't feel like one because the effect only becomes "supernatural" when its owner is dreaming, so in fact, the artifact doesn't have itself any magical property.

In terms of story though, if you squint, this is like a magical sword in a fantasy movie, or a special inhuman ability someone has in some other kind of story.

It's the interplay of that supposed property of the "token" with the "dream" universe of the movie that allows major plot progressions, and in a way lead, perhaps, to the most poignant question that the movie raises, when in the ending scene we see Leonardo's character in his supposed real home, we hear the voices of his children in the background, signifying they're playing outside, it has an idillic mountain/camp house ambience to the scene, yet at the same time, the spinning top is spinning on top of the table. The scene lingers a bit and cuts to the end. It's that lingering that makes it the most poignant scene in my opinion, because it kinda feels when you're watching just before it cuts that the spin top was already spinning a bit more than what would feel normal, and then it cuts and you don't have your answer. So without the spinning top you can't know if the character is eventually in "real" life and found the happiness with his family - that he continuously says is one of the motivations throughout the movie - or if the character is in a dream, addicted to a certain dream and is returning to it, and if so if either he's there voluntarily or he's stuck and doesn't know.

There's that final tension. I find some parallels to what our experiences in this reality, whatever it might be, can ultimately reveal us about reality itself.

In a way you can't really know if you're in a materialistic first reality, a conscious first reality, a simulation or a God made reality - that is functionally equivalent to a simulation, in the sense that for you, as the subjective experiencer of reality, you wouldn't be able to tell a simulation from a God made reality because they can look like exactly the same.

If I think about it, how could I know I'm in the "ultimate" reality, the real one and not in a dream, or a simulation (all those are functionally equivalent, so I'm going to refer to them as simulation from now on).
I need either something internal or external to this reality to show me that, or I need to have noticed or understood some detail that would indicate so.
Because how could you test it? And even if you were to be shown, or understood it by yoursel, or somehow woke up, got enlightened, whatever, then what? How could you know that you were not in another simulation or dream? And this is basically the problem. "We" don't have a magical spinning top and "we" don't know what "we" don't know.

So let's see the different types of philosophies that we can think of coming out of these different approaches we could take.

A materialistic first reality. This is what most atheists, marxists, utilitarians, etc, ascribe. They say there's nothing else than matter that happens to become conscious by chance and from there we get here through a sort of evolution. Notice here that when I say matter, because you are starting without consciouness, this can only be rocks, minerals, liquids? Not sure there can be liquids without life, but anyway it's this type of matter, not matter like tree bark, or flesh, because those can't exist without consciousness. This branch doesn't provide a framework for before, or after, sure, some theories might present but they're far from being even significant in gathered support for their views and not proved (some not provable with what we know and tools we have right now).

So the biggest gap in this philosophy, to me, is how do we go from unconscious matter to consciousness. I like to imagine it like this. Have you seen a lightning storm? One that goes for a while? Like those lightnings they occurr in that situation, in that context, atmospheric, temperature, etc, but they're fickle. The lightnings strike and disappear, the charge just dissipates into the material world. The conditions change, the lightning no longer strikes. So how could electricity be stored in matter in a way that would give rise to biological beings with consciousness?

It seems that a vessel that could contain the current in order to use it for consciousness has to be "designed" before (not strictly in the sense of intelligent design, just that it has to have come up somehow before) consciousness arises in the material world, because otherwise, how would it come to be? But then how would life get to that design without life a-priori, just from rocks and thunder? A rock charged with electricity wouldn't be able to give rise to intelligence RANDOMLY (yes, silicon indeed can be charged and "think", but it has to be excruciatingly designed at a scale beyond human sight, and it still doesn't evolve into a biological cell that has a self programmed will - I'm not even saying we can't get there, but I'm really doubtful that such sequence could happen randomly in a total material world).

The biggest problem is that without will/consciousness, that are immaterial properties, there's no reason for life to come into existance. Why wouldn't the universe be just rocks floating in space?
Even if we assume that because it has no beginning and no end it's infinite, and by being so it guarantees that all possible combinations of matter will occurr at some point, and as such can be assumed to have occurred and we can use it as assumed condition, even if a complex structure by pure random chance, that would be 2.225074e-308 but we're assuming the universe is infinite so we can assume this will too happen sometime along the way to infinity, and as such we can assume that that point is in fact now (or like some billion years ago), and was able to hold electricity in a contained way, why would that lead to consciousness? It seems that SOME directed consciousness needs to be there prior to enable a proper vessel capable of using that energy for consciousness to emerge. A bit of a snake eating its tail, or as we say in Portuguese, pescadinha de rabo na boca (hake with the ass/tail in its mouth) situation. 

That's my biggest gripe with it, it can't explain anything of the mistery. It also gave rise - until quantum physics started cementing themselves - to many branches of determinism. Like the thought that all humans are the same at birth (beyond the "rights"), just separated by class, hence material conditions, and that they're a white page that then can be culturally and symbolically programmed into an "higher" man - very common in all forms of socialism, be it national or international. Although it is clear that the cultural, material, social dimensions have a direct and significant impact on the adult human one becomes, it's not in that way. You can't make an assembly line. It doesn't mean that it can't provide philosophical advancements, or only has bad repercussions. As the saying goes, even a broken clock is right twice a day, and more than that, if you are using right and wrong to describe theories that means there's a point that should be the correct, which consequently also means that if you start deviating from that point for any reason, then usually the course to correct that will be to temporarly go in the wrong direction.

Variations, and they go back to the sperm and egg that eventually agree to fuse, result in individuals that have underlying "hardware" different between themselves. So while you can create a "program", your programming doesn't guarantee a deterministic result. For instance, imagine an overly harsh, militaristic, homophobic father. He makes it all clear all the times yet, sometimes, the son comes out gay. Or imagine a school, you teach a subject, the professor has an inclination, can't work around the bias, yet, even then, different people will react differently to the things he will be talking about, creating different interpretations. Now, in both cases, they all can exhibit and behave as if they weren't, and agreed, respectively, but their inner monologues can also be different from what they "signal" publicly. 

Obviously, if used to an extensive extent and well done, you can almost "create a new man", the thing is that it never really changes, it just puts on a facade according to the programming. But still, eventually, these systems, even those that manage that, seem to falter and fall. It's the nature of the human that never really changes. With the advent of quantum physics the classical model of physics stopped being the only way to describe reality, in fact, it became obvious that it's not total in any way and only coincidentally very useful, so determinism suffered a blow, but it recouped by integrating quantum physics' randomness, and allowing free-will. Materialism on the other hand has a bigger problem in my opinion because how does it bridge that gap between the materiality described and the apparent immateriality of certain aspects of reality.

If we look at a conscious first reality, on the other hand, it's immediately out of reach from a pure physics description, since we can't even define consciousness in any relevant non-ambiguous form. A conscious first reality allows many more easier answers - because they can't be tested as of now, only theorised - such as, if consciousness is in fact the underlying basis of reality, solving how do we get to conscious entities is pretty straightforward logically. The consciousness "field" gives rise itself to vessels that can contain consciousness, pretty much as the seed of a tree knows what the fruit will be and how to get there. In the end, the fruit bears the seed right? As you see, it's pretty straightforward and in case consciousness is the basis of reality it would make intuitive sense that it was so that we came to be. Variations of this chain of thought are gaya theories, cosmic universalism, etc. Again, if consciousness is the basis then the universe evolution is a manifestation of the will of that abstract consciousness, and the coming into existence of Earth itself too, and the evolution of life, etc. Similar to gaya (Earth) theories, where it's all the same thing and interconnected system that manifests in heterogeneous looking realities while sharing the same universal basis. In my opinion, such a view is ultimately indistinguishable (to the experiencer) from a God made reality or a simulation, although its conceptual frameworks are different. 

Now lets turn our attention to the next possibility, a God made reality. This branch of thinking obviously pressuposes the existence of a God that is above all. This is needed because how can you go from nothing to something? And if not, if everything, or something is always there, how can that be, how and why does it sustain itself eternally? Ĩf in your mind for some reason that second question leads to a nonsensical answer - the reason being you think there needs to always have a start and an end, and you don't believe (logic, personal experience, wtv) that the world is first and foremost material (because you had some experience that leads you to believe it's metaphysical due to syncronicities or wtv), then your only option is to believe in God, in some way. It's also why perhaps most of the initial advancements in science all started in religious contexts, it's very probable even that the experience of natural phenomena that seems to follow a logical reason strenghtens the belief in some logical order that precedes everything - it seems we can understand even parts of the invisible and all sorts of things beyond our natural abilities, and that those parts seem to be in their own way and context consistent (in the logical sense).

When we look at several scientists many do affirm a belief in God, and we can probably look at their unwavering dedication (sometimes ungratefully treated, not rewarded, etc) as the side effect of their belief in a logical God, because if God is logical then it must follow that reality, specially because he created it, is logical too, and if we're created in his image then the understanding of those logical connections should be in reach. At the same time, depending on how many people you would consider idiot, it could be used as an argument against the idea that God created us in his image, since there would be so many idiots that it would have to mean that God was in some fundamental level idiot too. But that is kind of elided by the argument of free will.

Going back to scientists. I'm not saying that the story of the apple falling is what gave Newton the idea for gravity, but I'm pretty sure we all have been, either directly or as observers, in situations where someone says "na, this must mean this, because of this and that", or "this isn't really possible in any reasonable way" and then someone goes "no, it's because this and that and you can see here and there", or "wait, but couldn't we do this and that, and then we get that? It seems like it should work". Right? People look at things, sometimes the same exact thing and they don't have the same ideas, associations, connections, feelings, being triggered. Taking the story of the apple falling, we could ask, how many people in the whole history of humanity have seen apples falling? So the question shouldn't be "If a tree falls in a forest and no one is around to hear it, does it make a sound?", it should be, "If a tree falls in front of you do you even see it?".

God has to somehow be bigger (in a energetic, intellect and informational sense) than the universe he's creating, otherwise how could he bring it to existence? More specifically, how could that entity be omniscient? If we know that each manifest bit of reality can't be reduced informationally to 0, otherwise it ceases to have any distinguishing feature from the remaining bits, and if it seems that the universe is infinite, for a conscious entity to be omniscient of every bit of it, it would need to be infinitesimally bigger than the universe it's omniscient about, otherwise where would the information upon which the omniscience is based exist? So we have to assume that if God created it, He has to exist beyond that which he created, and due to his other qualities, we must assume those other properties (e.g.: if God is omniscient about an infinite universe, he must be infinite Himself to accommodate all the quanta of information required to do any meaningful action that has any semblance of justice, morality and/or compassion).

It could also be that the things that matter are in fact invisible and in much less abundance and the exuberance of life is but mirrors, so that God would only need to keep track of a very small subset of reality to keep its supposed attributes of justice, fairness. Obviously, there could be other ways, but these are those that I can think of that make any sense. God could obviously be not definable or comprehensible by the combination of my own material body and mind. 

The same with relation to other gods, if there can be many gods and they can each create "realms" totally independent from each other, then this is less of a "God made reality", an instead the direct equivalent of a simulation, since each "realm" (the combination of people believing and some sort of organisative structure) will have its own rules according to who created it or rules it. If that is so then it shouldn't be that we have a universal baseline of what we deem moral, just and fair, that has been trending to the same direction across the whole world, mostly due to dialetics, war and commerce. It should be that each reality of each God would be, to have any semblance of fairness, rewarding of the qualities those Gods desire. So multiple competing Gods doesn't seem to lead towards that universalism either, because you can't be fair if you accept different measures of moral, justice and fairness. That's why for a God made reality to make sense you need monotheism in my view. The hindus thread sort of a mixed way, but they get a bit lost on the definitions in my opinion.

“Whence this creation has arisen — perhaps it formed itself, or perhaps it did not. The One who looks down on it, in the highest heaven, only He knows — or perhaps He does not know.”

In the end they seem to not conclude anything about how or who created reality, which is a very sensible position but makes it so that it's not really believing in a God made reality, just not refusing that possibility, hence why I say it's sort of a mixed way.

In Christianity and other monotheistic religions they argument that God precedes reality, and it's God himself that designs reality to his will, including yourself.

Because this isn't a particular essay on each of these branches of ideas, but instead an attempt to showcase why they come to exist and how they mold and format our understanding, our ways of life, our choices, otherwise how could it fit in a blog post, there's probably entire libraries written about these topics, let's move to the simulation reality.

Like I mentioned before, as simulation I will treat both in the technical sense and the metaphorical sense, both the possibility of living in a software based simulation and that of living in an hardware based one, both are the same for our purposes because they would look exactly the same to you, unless you had some spinning top to help you discern (I guess in the hardware one not even that). The same with like, ideas of an alien seeding, or extraterrestrial meddling with earth bound creatures, spiritually, genetically or whatever, all those, render the same situation, for you, e.g.: if you were seeded by aliens but you think you have evolved naturally from apes, or that God created you, it would be equivalent to living in a simulation, although there's no intrinsic desire to "simulate" anything.

It's interesting to also think, as purely speculative paths, that if it was some sort of extra-terrestrial seeding or meddling, the end result, besides being technically a simulation, also poses those other questions that a pure software simulation hypothesis would pose, how do you know when it's the "ultimate" reality, the one that is not simulated? But instead in this case it is, how do you know who is the originary extraterrestrial "source", would they be the originals? Would they have also been seeded? And if we somehow came to the conclusion they're the originals how would that elucidate us about the nature of reality? How did they come to be, how did consciousness arise in them too?

That's an important point. In this chain of thought, given what we know about the human body, reality, mind, we can imagine a technical situation or context where we would be experiencing a "simulation". If we can have Neura links messing around directly with memories, if we can figure a way to manipulate those memories directly, we could create a totally simulated experience, that anybody under that experience wouldn't be able to tell apart from their everyday experience, at least while in it. Right? So one of the things that messes this chain of thought is the "why?". Because depending on the why, or even if you can find one for your view, changes completely the ramifications of your experience of the simulation. And without a why there's really no reason.

For instance in "The Matrix", the reason why is that the matrix uses human for storing energy, many people come out saying it doesn't make sense, energetically, to use humans as batteries. It's a "Deus Ex Machina" nonetheless, anyway, there's a whole bunch of ways of justifying machines needing full-body developed humans with a functioning mind, so that is not really a problem, a bit of suspension of disbelief is normal when watching a movie.

Why would a simulation even be created? Well, we could think of some reason, we already kinda do it in smaller scales, even with humans, we try forms of organisation for different institutions that are essentially simulations, even in our everyday life I'm sure you have also done it. Like if you ever tested a friend, a partner, a person, your child, on their true intents, or how they behave in a given situation or context, then we can, technically, call that a simulation. You've simulated an occurrence, or architected it, to see how something would play out. That's essentially a simulation, if the people participating in it don't know, it's even closer conceptually to the spirit of "reality as a simulation" that you can't be aware of.

So the first "why?" could be simply as a simulation to examine future behaviour? Imagine, an advanced species that has found a way to simulate their systems and uses it to test things and take decisions. For instance it might test if a certain kind of DNA leads to a type of person or another, and if it leads to the desired type of person, then they proceed to use that DNA fragment to generate the next generation of their own species, or to-be-parents choose from a pool of their own eggs/sperm possibilities and play it out in a simulation that runs in 3 secs. Lets assume for the sake of discussion that this makes sense. If this "civilization" was looking for people who were extremely agressive, because it's totalitary, utiliarian, military species, then perhaps the test is if you are courageous and ruthless enough to rise above anything and anyone. The further you do the better the DNA strip scoring.

On the other hand, if this "civilization" was looking for the type of person that is peaceful, looks to help others, doesn't mistreat others, then succeeding in that kind of "simulation", where the "why" is that, means you would end up something like a Christian, or a Buddhist, or some gurus of different traditions,- if you look at it from the point of view of the All-Knowing Father, the Eye in the Sky, Karma, they would be pretty interchangeable metaphorically with a simulation that is being run with an evaluatory purpose.

Why is this theory important to at least consider? Because it's sort of feasible. You could be in a simulation, there's plenty of whys and technically it looks definitively possible. Why is it important to not be consumed by it? Exactly because you could never know without external intervention if you were or not, even if this one you could be sure, the same problems will just repeat one level above, and then another, and then another.

If this is so this tells you you should not linger on it, since it's not up to you to discern. If it's a simulation all bets are off. You remember that apparition of whatever you had, and took you on a long journey through X and becoming Y. Well, it was simulated. You see? There's no possible escape. This doesn't mean though that you shouldn't be aware of its possibility.

Going back to our topic at hand, it's impossible to know without direct intervention if we are in a virtual, God-made, or natural reality, and if we have an intuition that it isn't random, then we are bound to two of those possibilities and we can't discern between them (without a noticeable crack in the reality that would be somehow discernible and that we would be able to understand, or without intervention of some external or magical entity/power/object).

There's some details that might indicate a virtual or simulated reality. The way reality behaves in terms of measurements would be consistent with a system that is trying to optimize space and processing power. The same for an almost infinite but almost empty universe. It can look vast beyond comprehension but computationally, because it's mostly empty with inert and unconscious matter that follows pretty simple simulations - simple in the sense that it probably would cost less power to process all the info in 99% of the universe, the inert part of it, than it would to calculate fully one human life. Perhaps.

The, what appears to be, fact that certain properties of reality can only be known one at time, in that we can't really measure those properties at the same time, or the probabilistic fields used to calculate things at microscopic scale - this would be appropriate in what we call, in programming, a lazy iteration, meaning, the values are not calculated until someone looks at them, or something that is either conscious or is in the conscious mind of some conscious being (perhaps only human, who knows), interacts with it in any relevant matter. When this happens the details unfold, but until then no additional energy had to be used to calculate/process any of those particular things at that level of detail because everything else can be approximated statistically from a known base.

It's only when consciousness interacts that there's this explosion of possibilities. Now, it's important to understand that this could also be a natural world and those "glitches" are in fact artifacts of our methodologies, tools and understading. Given that we know that nature doesn't seem to waste energy, and goes for the path of least resistance, we could imagine a natural world that assumes such a configuration because it's the most efficient, in whatever relevant manners of efficiency ultimately matter. In such a natural world consciousness could still be part of the fabric of reality, which would force matter to have "crevices" where consciousness could plug itself, making this natural reality compatible with a simu-God-looking reality and at the same time with most modern understanding of reality at that level, where in fact it appears that matter is less solid than thought and where it behaves as if influenced by non-matter factors.

Now let's change to more practical, mundane things. Lets say you live on the West, is the democracy you live under really a democracy? Or has it been captured at different levels, not even only national, by burocratic groups managing the allocation of public money? In fact, it all seems to be democratic. You have elections, numbers come, you can see tendencies, bias, clear favouring, undemocratic treatment, both institutional and non-institutional, but ultimately, when a shift starts to appear, it ends usually being able to fight through the institutionalised corruption and capture. Ultimately it's mostly an illusion too. If you were to think through, yes, indeed, depending on the country and context, individuals that are the front-face of governments, or governmental positions, many times aren't those who are really in control. Many are just the figures that need to go into the cutboard shapes.

They pass laws that they were told to, negotiate towards something with personal and ulterior motives, then hold positions in concertated spots that allow them to cover each other's asses, steal money directly from projects, funds, and budgets that should have gone to other things, get together in their best suits and dresses and commemorate democracy while all their countries can't even fuck to maintenance levels, highest consumers of most hard recreational drugs by several miles, alcohol probably too, same for antidepressants, where public services, infrastructure, governance, locally, become everyday more enshittified, but then the "overlay" institutions put on this makeup of professionalism.

It's covid, millions spent in shit, but you put your mask on didn't you little piggy? Even if it's fake you're still the piggy-mor, the real trampa, never forget when you look in the mirror. In 6 months or so there were already contagion contact apps, a few more, biometric vaccination passports going to be implemented in Europe. 30 years they still can't trace where millions end up, but for your uniquely associated government issued wallet, oh baby, it even has GPS real time tracking. All paid with your money thank you.

You see the motor of the economic growth was drinking pig oil, while paying champagne to themselves, so most evolved, so above the other ignoramus peoples, hogs, that managed to loose a leading market, where they had like 50 years of advance, being inside or having access to the richest markets in the world, tying the whole industry and those adjacent in weak international positions, while, not without a reason but still, calling others "PIIGS". The problem is the red crossings. It's easy to prop your whole economy when you're buying at a discount from an enemy that has just invaded a neighbouring country. And you keep it going for years. Squeaky clean.

Then look at the services, I'm not sure how it's in other countries but I hear and see examples that are in some cases even worse, I don't know if to laugh or cry.
Civil servants, or public workers in socialist-tending economies (or others that manifest the same through nepotism, and such), because they're overly protected by the state (or nepotism, etc) have a for life tenure coming with it, for as longs as you just play the right game. You can't be fired for anything other than egregious faults for the most part or cabinet changes - but those are politicians, even though it mixes, here I'm talking mostly about the unchanging mass.

So people start treating those positions like they're something they're owed and that they own, like they somehow have the right to put their own emotions, opinions or will above the processes and law, transforming the position into their own little dick serfdoms.

For instance you might find out after you go get the previous contracts for your new rental's electricity and water that none of them match the real address registered in your contract. So you now have 3 addresses that don't match, the canonical one, the one from the property registration reflects an old address that no longer exists because the land was re-ordained and given new names and numbers, somehow though, because the budgets come but the outcomes not, there was no updating of the underlying records, who needs that, so the others have different addresses, besides the specific things different between each. It starts immediately here. This irregularity now seeps throughout everything it touches. It can create all sort of problematic situations that are the result of such systems. It's great to hide things too, because nothing is connectable, and it also means that if the State needs data to feed its decisions it's all a shithole.

Then you go, want to register a company, there's no calculator that can give you exactly what you're going to pay in taxes, and when, and how, no, you need to pay someone, to then not be able to tell you either, but you need to pay this person (the accountant) anyway. But the question here is, would you go to a restaurant, buy groceries in a store, or whatever, if that place told you, "know what? now you came inside you need to pick something, take it, and we'll tell you how much it is after and you can't return what you choose". Then add to this that you're forced by law to have this paperwork done, because there's no other possible way right. Really impossible to have a program that calculates immediately everything. Where would they steal from then?

Then they behave against the law themselves, in the regional counters, company counters, no responsibility, one says something, you waste one day fulfilling it, to then arrive at the other place, at your expense, and the person refuses to attend you, but accepts the money it would cost, and then you find out after a year that those things were never put forward because the change they should have triggered wasn't, and you only notice when you receive the yearly papers. No one responsible. This whore probably has worked there for 30 years, by the look of that diarrhea skin, going to work there until retired then retire with it all paid by others, the only reason she has a job is because probably sucked enough cocks or is the wife of some corrupt pig.

For you to understand the reality matrix you need to understand other things that aren't very pleasant. You know that saying, it's hard for a pig to understand he's a pig if his food comes from him not knowing he's a pig? You can put the cows smiling on the milk packets, tell your little children how it's all needed and for them while it's an excuse for you to keep being the same pig you always were. Your lies will catch up to you. Thank God.

You see in socialist rethoric, they always talk about how the struggle is in the name of the worker, how "work according to each one's capacity", and other pig lies. What they really mean by work according to each one's capacity is, we're going to be the genius bosses and you'll do whatever the fuck I want.
 You can see for instance the way the matrix operates in reality, through very subtle things. If you play the game of Civilization you'll see that one of the forms of government you can choose is "Communism". The game is a resource game, so you need to manage resources, and under "Communism" you get a whole lot of perks derived from the fairytale of "planned" economies. Your fields in the game start producing much more because the magic of communism automatically multiplies the outputs due to the genius level of organisation.

The reality is that the real genius communists in genius communist countries triggered several deadly hungers due to food shortages in a combination of retarded ideas, complete lack of organisational skills and systems coupled with endemic corruption. The genius in USSR Ukraine was developing out of the ass theories that were latter projected to have hampered significantly the agricultural output in several provinces of the USSR, one of the genius ideas was if and when the cultivars were rotting, to place them under the earth, as that would do some fairy tale magic thing. In reality as it was rotting, protecting the rotting thing from the cold and sun by covering it, with a layer of dirt, ended up speeding the rotting process manifold.

In China Mao manages to also kill a few and gave show of his enormous agricultural genius several times. One was the 4 Pests campaign, where he decided that to solve the problem of pests taking bites out of the perfect Communist productivity they needed to erradicate them completely, so they launched 4 campaings targeting rats, flies, mosquitoes and sparrows. The extermination of sparrows led to a several ecological imbalance that resulted, in the lowest numbers projected, in 15 million dead in 2 years of starvation, with some numbers going as high as 55 million.

This idiot was also the one who said some nice things about buddhism, the little pig, but now the CCP understood that Buddhism has more soft power than all their pig politburo together, and now is asking the Dalai Lama to re-incarnate in China. Imagine what kind of fucking retard you have to be. Then the real leap forward. After loans from USSR, help from other countries, a country of hundreds of millions at the fingertips and still these retards couldn't make it work. Then it worked when some Hong Kong chinese got the green light to build the first free economic zone of China, after the CCP had rejected it previously. But of course, the incompetence can only go so far because after a while heads will roll, so they went ahead and finally gave green light.

The rest is not history, because even the following growth was all dictated by economic partners that were capitalistic, with transfer of technology mostly coming from capitalist countries. China is now the country which produces more billionaires per year. And these guys do a parade for Mao. How do you want me to call you? Why would I want to be part of that or my society turned into something like that? Even faker than what it already is. So you can go on electric buses to your 9-5 to then eat a pre-cooked meal served by robots and keep your pig behaviours because now there's not even scarcity to contend for? Raising more little pigs that behave like individual cancer cells.

Then you look at Cuba, since 1958 under the Castros. Longer than many family royal interludes. But it's all for the people. Obviously that island is probably cursed because everywhere else on earth but communist countries, even in fucking siberia, people manage to create agriculture outputs in enough quantity to not need food stamps to distribute it. People living in houses that look like they were built on the first wave of Conquistadores. And the embargo doesn't count. For many of these years Cuba had direct MONETARY assitance from the USSR in EXCESS of the estimated losses due to the embargo - and this  was done so that the socialist solidarity against the capitalist rotten individualism was in full blown display. So they didn't really have any embargo in the real sense of the word. The USSR had an almost as extensive area of influence as the USA and Cuba was receiving money in excess of what they would be able to produce naturally.

But what did they do with that money? No one knows. Ta ta ta ta ra ra ra ta ta ra ra.

In Bangladesh they had a few millions to fix a central area of Dhaka, the millions disappeared, not a single improvement done, people living worse than pets in the west, but then the fault is of the West, obviously, not of those burka pigs.

Once I went surfing in Bali a retarded local went out at the same time and shouted to me "Go back to your country". I'm fine if people don't want foreigneirs in their country. But this fuck head is there surfing because foreigners came to that island and set that style of life. What that retarded deserved is to go back 60 years and go work the rice fields for his life and then sell his little daughters to get fucked to make money to pass by. And in this case it's even more egregious, these pigs coming from indonesia, with their muslim pig habits, they go there and set bombs and kill not only foreigners but the true locals, want to impose their rules over others that had been there for millenia. Can you imagine what kind of people this is?

Go see what this beautiful people did to the people of Timor-Lest when they decided to keep their independence. Go see. Fucking pigs. And then they go around talking about others with their pig mouths still dripping shit.

Go see Venezuela, where quality of life was skyrocketing before and see what it turned into. An open whore house and drug production country. Almost 8 million people got out just under Maduro's rule. A whole ton of others live, again, worse than some people would allow their pets to live in the "West". But the fault is of the West, not their pig development plans. Being the drug lab for Europe and Spain more specifically. You never wondered? Why these countries manage to live from what is essentially a plant that mixed with diesel, and grinded goes for at least 50€ a gram in Europe. You never? And why amphetamines for instance there's no traffic into Europe? Because they have their own labs in the Netherlands.

This is why you never catch drug dealers. It's always some retarded looking fuck that lives with 2 girls, 2 guys, a dog, and a cat, in a 2 bedroom flat that is the great mind behind some hundred million a container pop trip crossing several jurisdictions. Of course you can't have cameras on the docks, what non-sense is that, or you know automated x-ray machines, public records, etc. In all streets except the politicians homes and institutions, a camera per sqm, where it matters, ooopsie, forgotsy.

In a way it's funny that it's the fact that they're so incompetent that got them caught in all sorts of surveillance apparatus. That's what you get when you're only worrying about filling your filthy mouth like a pig. The sad part of this is the ones that have a hold of that information might not be much cleaner.

Do you ever wonder why laws are made the way they are? For instance prostitution. Isn't it funny that all these feminist parties, and so-called "socio-democratic" societies, all illegalize prostitution? I would say that with exception of women born/married to powerful individual/families the only women throughout history to hold any real amount of power were whores.

But this no good for business. So they make it illegal for a women to decide if she wants to charge money for a blowjob. To protect them. How funny it's then to find out whore houses everywhere, attended by politicians, cops, the guy from the barbershop, everyone. Then countries like Sweden, so worried about the little ones and prostitution, that it's completely illegal, you can go to prison for it, and because it's a cunt society you just need one retarded cunt to go to the police to get you in a whole problema.

On the other hand illegal undocumented immigration? Couples with several undocummented children? All covered from toe to head, no documents, from a culture that has contracts to fuck little children. That's all good. We're very humanistic, philosophical diarrheas. Let's not do anything about illegal immigration, which is the single-most linked factor to children-trafficking sex networks. Hmmm, how interesting. They probably want to teach them how to play LEGO after some good swedish meatballs.

Then the pervasive lies. Every country does the same but I know some examples in first hand from Portugal. I came to the conclusion that the reason they call names such as "Dark Ages", "Fascism", and talk so little about them is so that the incompetence isn't more visible. In Portugal they renamed the "Salazar Bridge" (built during and in honor or Oliveira Salazar the prime-minister during the Estado Novo dictatorship) to "25th April Bridge" (in honor of the Carnation Revolution that ended Estado Novo). So people might think that the existance of that bridge has anything to do with the socialist/communist movement of the time and consequent socialist/commie governments. But it hasn't.

Then when you ask about why Portugal stagnated for so long and still is in the tail of Europe, they talk about the costs of modernising, that they implemented public education, and so on so on, that's why the moneys goes and the country doesn't.
But when you look more closely - and I just want to leave on thing clear, I'm not in favour of a fear based dictatorship, fascist or not, even though Estado Novo wasn't fascist at all, and I don't think that "Futebol Fado e Fátima" is where I wanna be living either - during the "Estado Novo" they managed to raise the literacy levels to about 46/48%. This is almost 50%. We also have to take into account that the pivotal work is always the most difficult, because it involves setting up all the infrastructure, networks and systems that guarantee a system that can be in continuous operation throughout the years.

Not only that, they were involved in wars against enemies proxying the major global world powers across Africa, India and Asia. They held their ground pretty well and where betrayed by several international players all with their filthy interests, spreading propaganda about the plight of the african (which, obviously, wasn't completely uncalled for for Africa in general) brothers while helping in the destruction of countries that were at the time some of the highest quality of life countries in Africa, all so they could set up their oil operations and fight the "bad" portuguese that were enslaving the poor africans. Then after the so called revolution, civil wars, some that still are ongoing. I know there's at times interests behind both, but this just comes to prove that there's no natural "african unity" so far, even in the same countries, sometimes comunities sharing the same native language for centuries, they still fall to tribalism and in-fighting. So it can't all be fault of the westerner, independently if they did also hedious acts.

It's interesting that the country of the "Liberté, Fraternité et Egualité", as soon as Portugal found a profitable oil exploration in Angola started forming the first "freedom fighter" in Congo, that would later lead some of the first "rebels" against Portugal. They should add another one to their slogan, "et suiné". Trés high-couture.

And you can see the continuation of this on the narratives and how they're told. When people say "Portugal" was exploring these countries and took these countries, they're basically re-writing history - and I'm not saying that the Portuguese didn't do no wrong, pretty sure that is not the case - by framing it has if the "infrastructure" that existed in these countries had been stolen, or occupied by the colonizer, when in truth, they had all been planned, paid and erected by the Portuguese since around the 1500s. But when you tell the history in a certain way the picture you create in the mind of others is different. For instance, if you're black growing up in a western country, going through an education and propaganda system that perpetuates this kind of ideas without ever showing the counterpart, it's probably hard to not grow hateful.

You also see this for instance in many online indian comments, when the topics go around the "cast system", you'll see plenty of accounts making comments on how the cast system was introduced by the western elite, that before it was all peachy peachy. But history doesn't agree with this. I, by random chance, happened upon some information regarding a battle in India, between the Portuguese and an Indian General, where the Indians in an totally outlandish numeric advantage still managed to loose. As it seems, the general that lead the attack took that loss in such a way that he relinquished his duties and went to follow a monastic life. One interesting detail though, is that it seems that the portuguese had managed to get the help from some indian natives, that seemed to be "dalits". Meaning "untouchables". It's funny that the appearance of "dalits" in indian societies has probably to do with some dogmatic stance on meat eating, since that is considered unclean, and probably, because in many ways they agree on Ahimsa, non-violence, the only way to properly "show" them that their way of life wasn't welcomed was to turn them into dalits. Who knows right?

Another example is about the Inquisition, for instance in Goa. For all I could find, the Inquisition only acted on christians, it didn't have jurisdiction at all over non-christians. But, because the government was portuguese, and hence Catholic Christian, any person that was Catholic Christian would be in better light to improve its standing socially, economically, etc, as is natural, irrespective of what we might feel about it - there's probably certain positions that wouldn't be accessible unless you were a Catholic Christian. It's the same as when there's leftist governments and they fill positions with their allies. So this meant that many people would search for conversion, sometimes with only the objective of reaping the benefits of that status, but underneath would keep the same rituals, beliefs and ways of life.

I can believe that for instance in continental Portugal the inquisition was used, at least at times, to take things from people based on fake testimonies and so on. But in India it kinda doesn't make sense if you think about it. The portuguese had supremacy on the ocean, they won several battles completely outnumbered, made alliances with locals, passed laws to incentivise mixed marriages, etc. If they would want to take whatever they wanted (from lands they already controlled) they would have don't you think? Why would they do this half-assed dance to get to that? Bringing Inquisition to another continent, delegating part of the power to another institution, etc. But then I also don't know, it could be that in fact there were more abuses than cases like those, but it would seem that is not the case.

It's like when the marxistards attack Portugal, and the Spanish, and so on, and say things like, yeah they came and gave mirrors for lands, and blá blá blá. Again the same thing, these are the kind of things that pre-programmed retards spew. Things people who don't have a functioning brain say.

A mirror takes a civilization to be made. It's so unnatural that most animals take a long-while to understand, when they do, that its their own reflection. Of course, here you can say, they don't because they're not very bright, but you can, that nonetheless the Europeans knew the value of those things and as such were taking advantage. Ok. Now take a deep-breath and just think for a second, these same Europeans were buying fucking condiments with high quality grade weapons, mostly more advanced than what any of those local populations had access to.

Why would they trade condiments for weapons and ammunitions? The reason you shouldn't speak isn't because you're not entitled to a voice, it's because you're a fucking retard.

Another example. Many well-off women during slavery times would use slave milk-maids. This is always spun as an example of horrific treatment, by abusing a women for her milk to feed another woman's child. And while in part that can be viewed that way and I would agree that I don't want forced feeding, how do you concile a well-off women allowing their most cherished thing (at least most important even if not cherished, at that time offspring was an even bigger thing) to feed on the tits of a black woman and create an emotional attachment to another mother figure, that happens to be black. Don't you think there's something also a bit less ugly hiding in this act? Have you ever noticed how even across species, if you take care of a calf, a dog, a bird, a lion, or any other mammal, since they're newborns, that they will create an attachment to you for life. This would probably been known for centuries because animal husbandry has been a thing for quite a while.

So would you say that those children that would have been fed by black slave women would when growing up be less or more emotionally attunned to them, perhaps to their condition, and so on?

On the same topic, the miscigenation topic. Marxists will bring the fact that many paintings and cultural (propaganda at that time wasn't formalized but this would be similar) artifacts when dealing with the black african population in any positive light would always depict them as either being inserted on white households, being mixed race with whites, etc, not ever as example just by being black.

While this is in part true, and kinda can make sense to arguee that perhaps more only black lifting culture could have been produced, at the same time, you're again arguing that these evil people, that thought blacks were sub-human, closer to animals than to them, would somehow ignore all those ideas they had about them and go on and procreate, make families, and communities with them? It's that your thesis. That they were knowingly interbreeding with a lower species to produce handicapped offspring? Sounds really smart, I'll give you that. Not only that, but also, if the culture that arrived was "white", and they want to integrate the others, how would they properly depict that idea of integration other than the mixing of two different people into a mixed offspring?

But what gets me the most is the fake-revolutionaires. You know the ones that when they're in their democratic (they call fascist, colonizors, opressors, etc) countries they make all these noises, insult people, many times using lies either knowingly or unknowningly, as some of the examples already talked here, and nothing happens to them because guess what, for all its faults it's the best we managed without Kings of any kind that allows anyone to speak their mind, even when it's directly connected to their anus. But they could take their sorry asses, work one year anywhere eating ramen to put up enough money and then open their cellphone, book a trip, get a uber, enter a plane, fly directly to any country that they so like where they were explored so badly by the colonizers, get another uber, go to the place to check-in, all done through the cellphone, and go do manifestations right there where people are still trafficked and sold for dollars on a daily basis.

But they don't do that. Why? Because they would be killed and thrown into some road sideway and no-one would find them ever again.
Yet they don't do that but go on public insulting, in all kinds of ways, people that lived 500 years ago, some who crossed oceans multiple times, spending months in the sea open to dying from the most varied causes, who setup schools in the middle of hellish places, who many times protected native populations from the greed of other colonizers AND OTHER NATIVES, in places where mosquitoes carry diseases capable of killing you while you sleep, sometimes doing the months long trip back to arguee in favour of the natives, sometimes getting killed, imprisoned or executed in these missions, yet these fuck tards that never did anything for anyone else than themselves (and in this I count family as themselves) think they have the right to come insult people that aren't here to defend themselves and with resources that amount to 0 in today's world changed completely the history of the planet while they repeat worn out slogans from their little propaganda books behind their keyboards.

Going back to the "propaganda". So when we look at the 46% literacy levels left by the Estado Novo against the current state we kinda see that they actually, in 50 years, did the same percent wise and starting from a base that was setup up earlier by someone else, those they criticize. If you then start thinking that in this process the access to education became paid, the taxes grew and the services detiorated, it starts looking a bit like incompetence. Then think, not only that but they basically had what amounts to "infinite" money coming from the EU.

So the "Estado Novo", not only was having 3 wars to fight (Portugal currently, as many other NATO members, weren't even keeping with the agreed 2% spenditure...) set up education systems, not only on continental Portugal but also to some extent in the Ultramar, increased the gold reserves in an absurd manner, a pillow that now these incompetent corrupt pigs are sitting in while keeping Portugal out of a world war and making bank while at it. If you start analysing these things you start to understand why the only thing that is talked about this time is the secret police, lack of liberties, persecutions, etc. They don't talk how they were betraying their country by fomenting the growth of USSR influence inside the country and ultramar territories. Because when you see the result of the communist doctrine (that to be truthful they couldn't entirely know at the time) today, and how the history went, you can't help but think that from the point of national security and truth, the secret police were right, as uncomfortable as that is to say and were in fact too lenient (not that if they had been less, they wouldn't have perhaps faced an uprising earlier, but ultimately, they were right but didn't manage to act on that with enough contudency).

So what do we have now? A society of doctors, where most people go to finish higher education at the University level but all put their covid masks, because the statistics for flu (there wasn't any possible covid test then...) in the flu season were so high, then you see the data, flu cases 0, covid X where X is roughly the same number of annual flu cases that suddenly dropped down to 0. Don't forget to not catch sun. So what is this reality I'm living in? Is it the short bus reality? A God joke? A random fart? What is it? The only way I would be so shameless while behaving in certain ways would be if I knew I was in a simulation, like some NPC where my own self being the equivalent of a metaphysical turd wouldn't matter, because it was what had to be done as an NPC. Maybe in Christian terms it would be the equivalent of saying a reality where the Devil is the lord and everything in it an illusion of his own making. It's weird isn't it.

It's funny how some weeks ago Maduro was cheering on Putin's Ukraine invasion and hoping for a "swift" takeover. Must suck to get ass fucked while you're taking a nap, but perhaps next time you don't wish for other people to loose their lives, freedom and right to self-determination to appease your pig friends. You're probably not feeling that smart now. Imagine being willing to drag your people into a war with someone capable to put you back into the neolithic in a single night of work, coming all fanfarre, waving his little sword around like some sort of brave heroic leader, so you can keep making your country poorer so you get richer.

Isn't it funny how the left always ends up tangled deeply with crime networks? It's almost a modus operandi. They disarm the population, relax the criminal penalties in name of tolerance, re-education, defund the police, invite foreigner agents to setup bizzybizzy, while always claiming for higher taxes, delivering shit.
Have you noticed that Brazil for instance has some homicide rates that are almost at the level of war zones? Then you see these politicians all involved in drugs, prostitution, crime. Like the mafias this usually starts with at least a fair purpose, to give power to their community. But soon once power becomes established they start working against their own communities - not always directly but increasingly skimming and skimming and skimming and directly when someone dares to question. They loose the Robin Hood initial aura, that came with the protecting of the Italians or Irish, or Latinos, or the dispossessed, whatever, from the discrimination and attacks of other communities and get them respected, the lives improved but then, due to the greed that never ends, slowly metamorphosing into pigs.

And the left has decided to ally with criminals for the most part, in fact it's very in line with their philosophies, that power will not be exchanged freely by those who hold it, so it has to be taken by force. Isn't it funny that then they go on and immediately pass laws to disarm the populace? Fishy hummm.

Now I wonder, so these people believe, many really believe in this, to this day, that killing others, including innocent people through terrorist attacks, because they didn't want to share/give what was theirs in name of their abstract "soviet international" fairytale, was fair and necessary. A question of almost justice. Ok. So what would you think would be justice for people that have stolen that which is not even theirs? And in many times in magnitudes higher amounts than some of these other cases. Execution of them and their families in the public square? Execution of them, and any directly related family that is an adult and sterelization of the children?

I mean, if you compare the supposed "crime", I would say that that, in a scale that tries to be fair, would still not match what they did to so many people.
This is not to say that the great industrialists/landowners of the time were some peachy smelling flowers, obviously, but I always find it funny how these people are always searching to divide others and then go on behaving like a retarded parrot cheering for their club without any thought given to the contradictions. Because if I was born at that time and in poverty as many did, I would have probably became communist/extreme-left leaning, because even if I did know it was ultimately wrong, as said before, to correct a wrong route, you sometimes have to sail in the wrong direction for a while. But today? With all we know?

Have you ever seen communists or socialists that dodge paying taxes? Have you ever thought how our modern countries work in economical terms?

You see they keep expanding the public entourage across all board, tied up with their man made constitutions treated as if they were God given and immutable, which is funny for people that are always pointing their fingers to religion (except the Muslim pedophile religion) mocking them for believing a "fairy tale" document, but then they do similar, has if it was given by god, when you think about it, how does it make sense? Aren't you doing exactly the same, except for you it's this particular document that is treated as if God given, because it goes with your club?

Lets do an exercise. Lets say we're in Narnia, and Narnia's current available state budget is 10.000€ and Narnia's private economy is worth 10.000€ too. I live in Narnia too, I open a business selling my services to clients outside of Narnia, after paying for the priviledge and being treated like some sort of criminal by the Narnia retarded public officers. Everybody in Narnia is very smarty-pants. They created a system that you need to open a LTD responsability company, with a society by quotas but single ownership, yet you have to do all the rituals as if you had a quorum to respect, have to hire an accountant to basically submit the papers that they already have or can be submitted online, that can't give you informations about anything. Tells you to go do the registering of the company on a "friends" office, where they charged 280€, on top of the regular 200€ you have to pay the state, to submit an online form, don't even have prepared a small binder with some instructions, information, nothing, they leave the contacts names in the official systems with their own, no follow up, nothing. 280€ for half an hour and then go whining about digital nomads and how much they make... Oh, almost forgot, and when I visited, before returning with the papers and everything ready, they had told me 200€, but then it was after all 280€ - since that was tax they "thought I knew". This is the kind of people that live in Narnia, always behaving as if their pig behaviours are fault of others and not themselves.

So I opened the business in Narnia, the state received 200€, plus 80€ of the taxes from the office, the % of the accountant, the office got 200€ too.

The state now has 10.280€, the economy grew to 10.200€, so on...
Now I pay my first salary. As I said I work as a freelancer, now through a company and I had chosen a 2.000€ salary. My rental alone, plus internet, water, electricity, gas, phone, etc, would easily reach 800€ and more during winter - in a house where another pig from Narnia faked an energetic certificate and then when putting all documents in the contract binder, oopsie, just slipped it under the bag thinking I wasn't seeing and forgot to include the forged A category energetic certificate, because well, if that house is even a D would be too much, from raining inside, non-isolated ceiling windows with 3 finger gaps on the attic, etc, but that's another story. From that salary, because this is a company, in my name, with myself as a worker, the company pays out of its pocket (mine) the base salary, plus alimentation stipend that is legally required, one 12th of both the vacation and christmas subsidies, paid by the company each month or in total at certain dates (in this case I divided it to monthly payments).

So basically we're recycling the money through the tax system so they can skim it as many times as possible. They skim a bit in every one of these payment "steps" - from a nominal contract of 2.000€ I, "the worker", received 1.826€. But the company spent 3265€ (2450€ and an additional 815€ in Social Security) for the worker. Notice that I as an employer don't get any benefits from this, even though it's the employer who's bringing all this money from OUTSIDE the country and paying these things.

These numbers are all intentionally hidden, so that you don't understand how much the company actually pays for your work, so that they then can say "oh, they only pay 850€" or whatever when in truth is they pay much higher than that. Just take this example, the nominal contract value is 2000€ base salary, but in total the company spent 3200€ and the worker got 1800€. Adjust this to the reality of Narnia.

So after I paid from my own money, that was paid by someone outside Narnia, we can make the accounting again.

So now the state received close to 1.400€ in taxes, from this single payment monthly. So now the state has 11.680€, the economy has 12.000. This is so because in this case the money come from outside Narnia so both parts of the economy grow. Notice that the only benefits I get for this are as the "worker", I as the "entreprenour" that brings this businness I don't get any social security, or anything.

If you now take a public servant, that makes 2000€, the same nominal contract, how do you think we get the money needed to cover the total costs of 3200€? Let's see.

The public servant gets paid 1826€ just like me. So if the state has `10.000 - 1.826 = 8.174€`. The private economy now has 11.826€ (the employee received the money, so now that money is part of the private pool). But the state employee also has to get his social security, subsidies, deslocation stipend, holidays, etc, all of that covered, after all, not only that, this person when retires will continue to be paid from the public treasury. So the state also had to cover the remaining 1.400€, so the state actually has 6.774€. And obviously the state entered a "contract" with this employee that guarantees after some years that they will have social security (unemployment, retirement, etc), that's why we're removing that value from the state pool, because those are extra outputs that need to be covered when the time comes (obviously, they'll be used to cover current expenses, due to how budgeting works, it's always behind, which is great because you can steal and only down the line does it break, when you're already writing books about the great public work and being paid to give talks).

So the difference when I pay, from having received money from outside, is that both economies, private and state, grow, while when government employees get paid, they get paid with the money from the state. So we could say that the objective of a state is to properly manage taxation first and foremost, since it's with that that then it can create a sustainable army, infrastructure, education systems. But when you look at the ways, the processes these states have built you can see they're completely incompetent, right? They don't even manage to properly tax their people because they create these pig kafka systems where they can continuously steal and hide.

But it's not only that, if I now buy anything I pay IVA for it, and that IVA goes directly to the state, the business gets my money, which again, didn't even exist in the economy before, because this money comes from OUTSIDE. When this person that gets paid from the public treasury goes to pay, obviously also pays IVA, but when you look, that money came in the first place from where it's going back to. So there's only changing of hands. Obviously, most public workers will be in families with people doing other work and so incomes will mix and come from different places, yet, it's pretty easy to understand what I'm saying here - if you can't understand it you really shouldn't be in any position of governance.

So if I'm bringing in 5.000€ per month from the outside, if 10% of the active population of Narnia did that, it would mean Narnia (not the state alone, but assuming the people would need to spend money to live there, and store it in local banks, which is the truth) would be receiving per year (50.000 people X 5.000€ X 12 months) 3.000.000.000€, from outside the country alone directly into their economy, both state and to Narnia banks that hold that money, while exporting basically services. But the retards can't do maths so this is what you get.

Now take into account that many of the people in these positions act like they're the last cookie on the packet, because you have to go through them to get anything done. All of this while being paid their whole fucking life with the money of others. Obviously, I don't want to work for free, neither do I want others to do that, but if your income is solely tied to the contributions of others you better know your place you little retard.

How do you solve this? With transparency built into the systems, automated processes, some sort of limitation on contracts for public placements. I mean, why would someone be expected to work all their life in a guaranteed position, other than when involved with secret/security services/clearances? This removes accountability, the desire to change, because letting things stay as they are is the surest way to guarantee continued employment, not rocking the boat, even if you're seeing unlawful or plain criminal actions - and in a way you can understand why it is so, if you have children to feed, house to pay - so the system has to be built to not suffer from it where it shouldn't.

I should be able to do ANY action online, and then, for a whole class of actions, I would need to go to any public service and do a quick input of the action number, on a biometric machine, that would then just print a receipt of confirmation. So you could have all the basic actions be automatic just online and anything more important guarded behind a simple two-step process that doesn't require any other input from any other person.

So you do the action online in the morning, then during your lunch break you go to validate it if needed. And now you have video-proof of the individual (because the public service has video surveillance) going to a public service, then entering the "confirmation" code along with their biometric details to confirm, and getting a physical printed receipt, the state has the digital records and also the physical original/duplicate emitted to the person.

This means it's not only or all "digital" and as such no longer problematic from a security and data integrity, tampering, hacking, etc, point of view, because important actions will need you to physically go to a place, solve a biometric challenge and confirm your intent, while producing along the way a bunch of auditable artifacts without needing ANYONE ELSE to waste time dealing with it.

The same with transparency. Taxes, payments, subsidies, should be calculated automatically from the minute you're interested in opening a company/getting a job and you fill a form putting employees salaries, expected revenue, etc. And this would be VALID legally unless you did something illegal or you didn't include the proper items to simulate. Otherwise, if what you input is the truthfull information you should know up to the cent each month, each payment, each tax return, you will get with exact dates.

This should all be automated, because it's exactly in all these manual processes and shit systems that the corruption hides. All under a cover of pretending to be small minded and a little retarded to not raise suspicions. There's other things that are in dire need of happening. Public servants in any condition with exception of special forces/secret services have to have a completely transparent financial life. All public institutions have to provide publicly and guarantee its ACCESSIBILITY all their spenditures and who signed them. All benefits, bonuses, social security payments need a confirmation period of at least 8 years for any public (state) company, public servant, politician, etc. So that there's time to both access the repercussions of the work/spenditure and if any illegality surfaces. 

This removes all the shit-layer of parasites and sanitises the pigsty. But the pigs are already squeaking and putting their fingers where they shouldn't. 

Once they come with vacination passports and integrated bio-medic chips, you'll need to force, even if by way of civil war, that it all starts by implanting those in the public servants, politicians and friends and make sure the system is publicly disclosed and auditable. You don't need to play this game. They have no power but they want to convince you they have. You don't need any of these things. If they made law be respected, criminals swiftly dealt with, proper immigration laws, you wouldn't have all these problems they want to solve with these solutions.

It's like forcing age-restriction on internet access, the way they projected is just for control. My first porn movie was a friend who found it in someone's secret stash. I would have been at most 11 or 12 I guess... It was a VHS tape, called "Dog luck" (or something translated to that in english), it was a German movie, where two girls take turns getting fucked by a german shepard dog under the caring eye of a male adult who just talks through the actions. I didn't need internet for this. And this wasn't the first and only VHS we had access to, a girl once found one and we did a cinema session in her house, about 12 people, to watch it, this time only humans were in the movie. Except one guy and one girl at that time, we the boys were really cuckolds, and didn't take any action... All this to say, that what this creates is a black market, the same way we got older people to buy us cigarettes, alcohol, you'll have kids trying to get sexual content access - intermediated by adults, is this better? I think the effort should be in making OS/hardware that are safer by default (not locked down, just not purposefully written to be full of holes), but even if that doesn't happen, parents already have ways of preventing access.

The same with some of the internet related rulings, the little pigs in the European Parliament pass these laws where they fine the big players but then everything just stays the same, no real change, just extorsion. Then they want respect. Imagine this, you want to build some business say like Paypal, Uber, AirB&B, in Europe... How do you think that would go in terms of regulamentation? Would never get off the ground, because all those other interests would not allow it - taxi associates have to pay for certification, etc, same with rentals, etc. These platforms all skip that substituting it with their own selection processes. So what happens? European businesses can't go these ways and try these models but then Europe goes and says, you know what, they, they can operate under these models, it's just you  that can't. Then they have the grant mafia, where there's all this innovation grants and it's always the same guys getting them, a burocratic paradise where many leech off, because you need a whole bunch of burocratic tokens that require some know-how and inner knowledge to make it go through. Are all projects crap? Obviously not right, but damn, it would be much proper to diminish this and remove costs for creating enterprises, from micro to whatever.

Look at the European Union, all these years and not a single unified way of making business across countries and for the external world for small/self-owned companies. Everything the same as if you were doing business locally, same taxes even though you're acting as an exporter for services, etc. It was more important to be throwing moustache parties.

Then instead of removing taxes and impediments to creating businesses they just make it worse, individually and at the European level. And my problem with this is not that I don't think something like an European Union doesn't make sense, but what they set up is basically this system to skim money without any accountability, delegating decisions behind doors to unelected interests. The grant systems, loans, funds, little mafia run groups taking turns grabbing funds. Instead of this crap, wouldn't it be easier to just remove all costs to create, manage and close a company?

That would be something huh? But then where would you do your "socially worried redistribution of wealth" to your friends pockets?

You would have 2 free company registration, maintenance, wtv per 5 years. If any or both of those companies produced 1 year of employment for at least yourself with taxes paid, you would get again free company registration, maintenance, etc. Just plain, straightforward systems. Then if you want to audit, guess what, easy. The person building something, even if its own income and covering his supposed "social costs" to the state, shouldn't be paying this shit.

So people that go around jumping from job 6 months, another 6 months, then unemployment benefits, then another job, then unemployment, they get these benefits, and those that are at least covering their asses are extorted. At least remove the costs idiots.

Now lets talk about on-line identities. I projected a platform a long-time ago, dvouch, that would allow digital validation of identities without leaking anything at all, if the user so wished. The way it worked is the user registers on dvouch, then chooses from a preset of vetted platforms, and dvouch would connect on behalf of the user to those other platforms and extract information from them. Things like upwork.com, facebook.com, youtube.com, image selling platforms, etc. The idea was to expand it to all relevant platforms in use as dvouch grew. Anything where you had an identity and public information (or accessible behind the granted access). What this would allow is that for instance, I could use any alias for my name publicly, for my dvouch profile, then connect to my real upwork profile, by showing proof of credentials usually, extract the job history from upwork, and now display it in several manners. If I want anonymity I would choose to show that data as simple bucketed graphs - number of jobs on dates, success rate, total feedback, without showing any particular details that could identify me or those who hired me.

If on the other hand I wanted my profile to be public and publicize those same jobs I have completed, I could instead show not only the aggregate graphs but also a list of all jobs, with their rates, feedback, etc.

Because only a single account can be connected to each of these external providers and because it's dvouch that handles the data and displays it, the user can customise a lot of its profile but not the data points, those are always based on data coming from the real apis dvouch interacts with, anyone seeing that profile can know that whoever that is, those jobs happened, the stats are at least real. Then the profile had a simple contact form section where you could interact with the user by sending a message. No e-mail was disclosed, but allowed you to verify that by getting an answer it was really who the person said he was, as in, if someone sent you the profile and said, this is me, check my work history, you could go there and then send a direct message to the owner of that profile and establish if it's the same person that's talking with you.

Of course, without any way of really verifying the person who created the profile and connected the other platforms (no state/global identity system), it could be someone else, but since only one same account from each of the other platforms can be connected to a single dvouch account, there's not many ways to take advantage of it, and is not much different than someone hiring someone to do the take-aways interview, phone-call or whatever and faking some documents, it will always happen, but in this case it will at most happen to 1 of each external profiles per account. 

I do believe that states will have at some point to create such systems (publicly) and that in part, as it already happens, surveillance will be built-in. Still, a citizen should be able to yes, claim they are someone online and prove it, through some secure government provided platform (auditable), because this is useful, but at the same time should be able to go anonymously online, and up to a certain extent not be tracked by 3rd parties and by the state unless in a grave suspicion (in the case of the state it's not even that the records can't be there, they theoretically could, but they shouldn't be accessible in any way unless under strict but reasonable conditions, and that's the hard part). It should also be possible to opt simply out of this system by not being forced to participate through it, but I imagine that even due to simple commodity and the advantage of having more data, that it will be impossible to not be registered somehow, as is already the case today, except it will be accessible almost real-time digitally instead of having to be dug for in real-life book keeping (while still being kept in that form as well somehow).

This also automatically separates things for those using the on-line spaces. If you're saying something outrageous but you're using a non-verified account to post it, I can approach it with a bit more caution from the get go, be the idea, the content, etc. If you use your verified name, your real person, exposing yourself, then even if I don't agree with you, I can know it's you. I can perhaps understand better some things. The problem with this is that it would sink the current web-ad model. Nonetheless, I don't see any reason why ads can't be made to work in other ways as well.

Then you have minorities and the discourse of the left again, all corrupt many times in bed with these criminal organisations. For instance in Portugal there as always been a problem with gypsies. Ever since I remember, when growing up an older boy, Luís (I can't recall if he was 14 or 15 or something like that, he was not like friend directly because he was older, but he lived closed by one of my best friends and was friend with that friend's older brother, who was his age), got stabbed to death by a gypsy, on a local fair, like animal/agricultural fair. Gypsies that traveled nomadically would visit fairs and sell their wares and this time although I don't recall exactly what happened I'm pretty sure it was not warranted a death, because most probably he was telling them something he was right about. Nothing happened. No one could find the gypsies nor who did it. A kid just lost is life like that.

But there was never, not even from those who knew the kid, any direct antagonism towards "gypsies" simply because they came from gypsy families. There were at least 2 gypsy families that had settled in that city, one had a big store, big window panes, right at the entrance in one of the nicer avenues of the city, the other a bar of dubious nightly activities (and there was at least a more famous "night" bar in town owned by others). The textile/clothing owners no-one mentioned them as gypsies, unless to disambiguate, they were no longer gypsies although they still had a bit of style, flavour if so to say, maybe 1st or 2nd generation to have settled, super nice people from all the times I interacted with them. The other family one of his sons was a very good friend of mine and of our other mutual friends, even though the bar was shady, our parents had no problem in letting us sleep over in his house and he did sleep over mine and others in our normal group as anyone else. No one even thought of calling them gypsies, much less gypsies in any negative way and one or two generations before they would have been living the way that the term gypsy usually implies.

Later on in another city, more to the interior, I was working on a coffe/restaurant and there was also seasons in the year where gypsies would come to visit. In that place the owner wouldn't allow us workers to serve gypsies before paying after too many fights involving unwillingness to pay, threats and so on, he decided no more that year. I asked why and I was told that besides those issues he himself had in the place, there were always robberies while they were camped around the city. Every year. I never thought about it anymore, later also went to university so only returned in the weekends of my first university year to wait weddings and, in one of those weekends, I was told that a gypsy encampment near that city was set on fire. They never settled again there and all those issues seemed to suddenly disappear. There's also other nearby cities that have some issues with them but there they live in government provided habitation, they're not part of these nomadic groups.

So there's always been quite a bit of tension. At some point I lived in Peniche, where there's also a notorious community living nearby. I knew a few people living there, some doing uber and bolt, many people complained, refused to serve the area where they lived for deliveries or pickups, due to multiple issues, or fear of issues. One day I had to go to the hospital, I went very early. I arrived not sure if around 8 or 9 am, there was big gypsy family sitting on the waiting room. A mother with many children below age 6 and one or two older than that. Immediately after sitting one of the boys come talk, ok, I strike conversation, it's a kid right, 4 or 5 years old, 3 phrases in he's doing gun signs and "pum pum" sounds and telling me his father has guns. Cool. I cut him off. Remember, owning guns in Portugal is illegal unless you have a license, some rifles can be owned if you have an hunting license. I sincerely doubt any has a license obviously...
After some 15 minutes I start hearing the sound of water running. One of the little girls, sitting by the side of her mother, both on those waiting plastic chairs, was on her knees on top of it pissing on the chair, dripping to the floor. And the mother nothing. Just like it was not her problem.

5 minutes after the father comes out, sitting on an hospital wheelchair, surrounded by a doctor, a nurse, with serum being drip-fed, all good. The mother picks their children and just goes away and leaves the chair in a puddle of piss dripping to the floor, not a single word.

I don't know but, honestly, my parents always owned dogs and cats throughout me growing up, and I don't ever recall a dog or a cat not learning to not piss or shit inside houses, not even only our house, just houses in general in less than a month. Somehow these people, can't teach 4 or 5 years old these things. So they're in an hospital paid by portuguese people (they're the ones who don't want to be portuguese), raised by the Portuguese Republic, offering them a service they don't even pay, nor their community can provide themselves, as they don't pay other things (these types of gypsies, not gypsies by blood that have decided to just be portuguese and made their lifes, these "true" gypsies many live in government provided habitations where they pay a symbolic rent, sometimes 5€, and get benefits for every child, which they then can marry as young as they please between them because of culture and keep doing this).

There was at least 1 mother with a little child there, a bit far away from me, I was in the middle with a bunch of chairs between, looking like she just woke up at 6 am to bring the child, had to miss work, also known as "looking like shit", and some other people there too. And then they're sitting on a public hospital, with the known conditions and already known problems, and they still have to put up with more this shit, and if they say something they'll have problems, might be threatned or assaulted (my daddy has gun bum bum) and police, public officers do nothing. So the people that do everything as required in their duties as citizens are the ones that have to put up with this sort of crap caused by others who refuse to be part of that society in any helpful way. The same for the guys threatning people in public transport, taking over public spaces like they're theirs, what the fuck are we doing over there? 

So instead of animals learning how to behave, it's the others that have to live like animals to not offend them. And the left is playing a problematic game, because this is the continent of Hitler and many others, and then when it has no longer a proper non-violent solution you'll look away and pretend it's not your fault in the way you've lead and modeled society. Obviously, this is also because in part you have allies in these criminal communities.

And this is the problem and mark of moral bankrupcy of the left. Without even talking about Islam and other things. They prefer to protect the poor guy who just happened to have robbed, did armed threats to others, sometimes exerted violence and even killed others, for the sake of their psychological being, at the expense of the physical, financial and psychological health of all others.

The same for immigration, oh, you want to become nationality X? Well, how nice of you. We're ready to welcome you, you just need 15 years of a clean sheet, no criminal charges plus either with 70% of that time under declared working contracts with private companies or generating a tax return of > than X. Complete fluency in the language. Etc. If you really want to move to another country you won't be doing shit, sorry. Yes, everyone (most) is entitled to a second chance but sometimes you screw too badly too. When I go on vacation I make an effort to not disrespect those that are hosting me, even if I diametrically think the opposite of them, although nowadays that doesn't happen because I just refuse to go where I don't agree with the general culture, but when I was younger I didn't have neither the same knowledge nor the same views but yet I still thought it was essential to not disrespect the countries I'm visiting even though I would also be paying tourist taxes, I didn't treat it as an entitlement, because honestly my individual contribution is in itself insignificant. To then see people that come and behave that way? What the fuck are we on over there?

So to me is a big surprise when people move to these countries with the pretext of asylum or looking for better life, or working, studying and then they get involved in drug dealing, crime, robberies, gangs, organised violence, human trafficking and/or are unable to let go of their "cultural" habits. If you want to keep them and they conflict with those who are already there, then go back to where you came from.

And it's not that those things don't happen with natives, but it's different when someone comes to another country and behaves that way, it tells you all you have to know about the mentality of that individual/group and you're not bound at all to please, host, or protect them, other than protect those that are law abiding and really intent on becoming citizings, as you would any future citizen. It's important to not let racist discourse take over because while it can be tempting there's cases where people of those cultures, race (?), language, as I spoke before, that were and are completely integrated so it's an awful thing, not even awful, it would be outrageous, to allow those to suffer because of those others.

And this is the last point. The actions of these so-called communities and their own ignoring of these problems hurts their own community but they don't care, they just want to keep behaving as animals and throwing blame on someone else.

I'll give you an example with something else entirely. Once, a couple years ago, I was watching a youtube video roundtable with some westerners and some vietnamese, and one of the vietnamese guys in the middle of talking about how vietnamese people are regarding foreigners just goes, yeah except black people, not really a racist thing, it's just we don't want that kind of behaviour here. This was around the time two afro-americans (not american-africans, or amerindafricans) girls had made a scene in a nail/hairdresser shop in Bali that made the rounds in youtube and got them in serious trouble, they walked into a shop, got all the services, then refused to pay and then started threatening the shop girls and if I remember correctly started a physical altercation.

So now a black guy that never did shit to no one is just thought of as sort of an animal because of the behaviour of some.

And this is not like white foreign people aren't getting into issues in these countries regularly too, but usually it's in night out shops, bars, with alcohol, nightlife, it's a different thing than out of nowhere on a sunday morning a violent confrontation after applying nail gel or dread locks, that's why on those venues there's security, extra policing etc, because even locals will get into night life related altercations regularly.

Ultimately, you have to ask yourself, if someone robs, attacks, threatens, sometimes kills, others, out of nothing else but self benefit, or some petty shit, how does this person "want" to be part of society? Why should this person even have access to that option after behaving in such ways?

This is how you end like Europe, a corrupt bureocratic pigsty, infinite money for football stadiums, whore parties, dinners and lunches for the friends and the gang, doing the great business and a never ending expansion of the pig machine.... Age of retirement going up, houses out of range for most people, prices through the roof on everything, sale of profitable state enterprises (by these socialists, communists, leftist pigs), industries with years upon years of advantage getting taken for lunch by countries which got the technology from Europe and USA, no army, unable to spend 2% for self-defense... 2%... Again for football, pigsty non-profits, retards, cunts and dick suckers, shitty enterprises, for the friends, for COVID vaccinnes, for the professional commentators on TVs, journals, etc, there's always money for that. A woman from PSD was on the Parlament for 10 years got retired with a lifetime of 5.000€ monthly payments ... From the time she retired, taking into account life expectancy, she will get from the state in those remaing years more than 3 million €, paid by you, by doing nothing, after having been paid all those other years...

Isn't it interesting what these pigs did with Europe? Imagine a continent with this much potential, can't even fuck to replacement rates, more than half the population addicted (between alcohol, recreational and medical drugs) and the only ones interested in settling here are whores, pigs, criminals (from petty to high-crime) and people who come from places where they live worse than pets in the West... This is what Europe has become, the second biggest consumer market in the world can't even renew themselves... You know why? Just pigs and retards like you would like to live in the world you created, and this is what you see... It's people who have invested too much and can't get out (life, house, work, etc) the politicians and civil servants that have for life positions, those who can't get out and the drugged out retards that just go through life like some fucking automaton that can't even string a logic thought from A to C even though he spent 12 years on public education, 9-to-5. Really amazing.

Hope this expanded your view off the world and make you more aware of the reality in which you thread.





